# Lab Exercises Week 6: Numerical Computation; Primes

## Expectations, pre-requisite knowledge

This week's lab is relatively short, so catch up with previous tasks if you
left them undone. Once again, you may want to get together with your neighbour
and go through the questions together.

## Learning objectives

This lab is designed to make you try out Haskell for numeric computations.
Optionally, you may learn something about probabilistic prime number
generation.

## Activities

1.  The attached Haskell script `Numeric.hs` contains code for prime number
    generation and related tasks. Copy it to your own directory, study it, and
    try evaluating different expressions, such as `take 100 primes`,
    `primes!!1000`, `isPrime1 111811`, `isPrime2 111811`, `mersenne`, and
    others.

2.  Why does `isPrime1` use the hand-crafted `isElemOf`? Why not just use the
    Prelude's `elem`?

3.  Which of the three approaches, `isPrime1`, `isPrime2`, and `isPrime3`
    appears to be best?

4.  In 1640 Pierre de Fermat made a famous conjecture, namely that all numbers
    of the form 2<sup>k</sup> + 1, where k is a power of 2, are prime. For
    example, as Fermat verified, 2<sup>16</sup> + 1 = 65537 is a prime. Use
    Haskell to show that Fermat's conjecture was wrong.

5.  Marin Mersenne (1588-1648) was interested in numbers of the form
    2<sup>n</sup>-1\. He noticed that 2<sup>2</sup>-1, 2<sup>3</sup>-1,
    2<sup>5</sup>-1, and 2<sup>7</sup>-1 all are prime, but he also quickly
    realised that 2<sup>p</sup>-1 does not have to be prime, even if p is.
    However, primes of the form 2<sup>p</sup>-1, where p is prime, are known as
    Mersenne primes. Using the Haskell code, find some more Mersenne primes. Is
    2<sup>17</sup>-1 Mersenne? How about 2<sup>47</sup>-1?

6.  Write a Haskell program to help refute this claim: For all k, if
    p<sub>1</sub>, p<sub>2</sub>,..., p<sub>k</sub> are the first k primes then
    (p<sub>1</sub> × p<sub>2</sub> × ... × p<sub>k</sub>) + 1 is a prime.

7.  A _prime pair_ is a pair (p, p+2) where both p and p+2 are prime. Find the
    first 50 prime pairs. While we know that there are infinitely many primes,
    it is not known whether there are infinitely many prime pairs.

8.  A _prime triple_ is a triple (p, p+2, p+4) where each component is prime.
    How many prime triples can you find?

## Optional activity

### Recognising primes faster

The function `isPrime3` is quick enough if you want to test numbers with up to,
say, 10 digits. However, for a number n with hundreds of digits, it is way too
slow. The number of candidate factors considered, in the worst case, is the
square root of n.

Faster algorithms for this are _probabilistic_. They use a very fast test that
depends of some random choice of a number. If the test fails, then n is not
prime. It the test succeeds, then n is prime with a certain probability.
However, this probability can be made arbitrarily close to 1 by repeating the
test.

The standard approach relies on Fermat's Little Theorem: If n is prime and a is
a positive integer smaller than n, then a<sup>n</sup> = a (modulo n). (For two
numbers x and y, x = y (modulo n) if x and y have the same remainder when
divided by n.)

The attached script utilises this, as follows. The function `expmod` calculates
b<sup>e</sup> (modulo m) efficiently. The function `fermat` implements the test
like so: Given a candidate n, it picks a random number a < n and finds
a<sup>n</sup> (mod n). If this differs from a, then n is not a prime, by
Fermat's theorem. Otherwise it may be. Now repeat with another random number a,
up to 100 independent tests. If they all agree that n is prime, then `fermat`
reports that this is the case. Note the use of Haskell's `System.Random`
library.
