# Lab Exercises Week 7: Manipulating Sets and Relations

## Expectations, pre-requisite knowledge

Once again, you may want to get together with your neighbour and go through the
questions together.

## Learning objectives

This lab is designed to make you more familiar with important concepts related
to sets and binary relations.

## Activities

1.  The attached file, `SetOrd.hs`, contains a Haskell definition of a Set
type. The (hidden) representation of sets uses ordered lists. The advantage of
hiding the details is that we could later replace the implementation by one
that uses a more efficient representation. Copy the script, and also `Rel.hs`,
to your own directory.

2.  Study the Set module and add a function `union :: Ord a => Set a -> Set a
-> Set a` which gives the union of two sets. Optionally, add `intersection ::
Ord a => Set a -> Set a -> Set a` which gives the intersection. Remember to add
these functions to the list of functions exported from the module.

3.  Add a function `powerset :: Ord a => Set a -> Set (Set a)` which returns
the powerset of a given set. Add it to the list of functions exported from the
module.

4.  `Rel.hs` implements binary relations as sets of pairs. Study the script and
then add a function `isSymm :: Ord a => Rel a -> Bool to test whether a given
relation is symmetric.`

5.  Add a function `composeR :: Ord a => Rel a -> Rel a -> Rel a` so that
`composeR r1 r2` is the composition `r1 o r2`.

## Optional activities

### Closures of binary relations

A more tedious task is to implement functions for various kinds of closure. A
good challenge is to extend `Rel.hs` with a Haskell function which takes a
relation and returns its reflexive transitive closure.

### Binary relations represented as functions

Instead of representing binary relations as sets of pairs, we could choose to
represent them as Haskell predicates, that is, the type of relations over set
`a` becomes `type Rel a = a -> a -> Bool`. In many ways this leads to shorter,
more elegant, function definitions.

The connection between the two kinds of representation is the concept of a
_characteristic function_ on a set. A binary relation on `A` is a set `B` of
subsets of `A`. We say that `f : A → {0,1}` characterises B iff `B = {a ∈ A |
f(a) = 1}`.

Explore an alternative version of `Rel.hs` which makes use of a "function
space" representation instead of the "sets of pairs" representation.
